---
title: java嵌套类
date: 2018-03-03 20:39:30
tags: 
- 类
- 
categories:
- java
- 基础

---
<Excerpt in index | 首页摘要> 
讲解java中嵌套类的概念，也就是在类中定义另一个类的概念（未完待续。。。）

<!-- more -->
<The rest of contents | 余下全文>

## 嵌套类

java语言允许你在一个类中定义另一个类，这样的类称为嵌套类，形式如下：

```java
class OuterClass {
    ...
    class NestedClass {
        ...
    }
}
```

> 术语: 嵌套类分为2类：静态、非静态。静态的嵌套类称为静态嵌套类，非静态的嵌套类称为内部类，如下所示：


```java
class OuterClass {
    ...
    static class StaticNestedClass {
        ...
    }
    class InnerClass {
        ...
    }
}
```

嵌套类是包围它的外部类（enclosing class）的一个成员，非静态嵌套类（内部类）可以访问到其他成员，即使它们被定义为私有的（private）。静态嵌套类不能访问其他成员。作为外部类的成员，嵌套类可以被声明为 private, public, protected, 或者 package private 四种访问权限

**为什么要使用嵌套类呢?**

- 这是一种有效组织那种只在某一处使用到的类的方法：比如一个类只对另外一个类有用，那么把它们两放在一起，嵌套在一起是合乎逻辑的，将这样的辅助类（helper classes）嵌套在一起使得java包更加简洁合理.
- 增强了封装性: 考虑两个顶层类（top-level classes）, A 和 B, 其中B需要访问A的成员，否则这些成员将被声明为私有。如果将B藏在A中, A的成员即使被定义为私有的，B也可以访问到， 另外，B本身也与外界隔离开来
- 更加可读，并且有利于维护代码: Nesting small classes within top-level classes places the code closer to where it is used.

### 静态嵌套类（Static Nested Classes）

与类方法、类变量成员一样，一个静态嵌套类与外部类是相关联的，而且与静态方法类似，静态嵌套类不能直接获取到外部类的实例变量或者其中的函数：它只能通过类引用来使用它们。

注意：静态嵌套类与其外部类（或者其他类）的实例成员之间的交互，就像其他顶层类之间一样。实际上，一个静态嵌套类在表现上像是一个顶级类，其实是嵌套在另一个顶级类中的，以方便打包。
使用到静态嵌套类时必须通过外部类，形如：`OuterClass.StaticNestedClass`
比如要创建一个静态嵌套类的实例，语法如下：
`OuterClass.StaticNestedClass nestedObject = new OuterClass.StaticNestedClass();`
​	 
### 内部类（Inner Classes）
与实例方法、实例变量成员一样，一个内部类与外部类的一个实例是相关联的，而且能够直接访问到外部类实例中的方法与变量，而且因为内部类是与实例相关联的，因此内部类中是无法定义静态成员的。


内部类的实例只能与外部类的实例同时存在，无法独立实例化，并且能够直接访问到外部类的方法与变量
想要实例化一个内部类，你必须先实例化一个外部类，然后才能通过外部类创建一个内部类的实例，语法如下：

`OuterClass.InnerClass innerObject = outerObject.new InnerClass();`
内部类中有两种特殊的类：局部类、匿名类

#### 局部类（Local Classes）


Local classes are classes that are defined in a *block*, which is a group of zero or more statements between balanced braces. You typically find local classes defined in the body of a method.

This section covers the following topics:

- [Declaring Local Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/localclasses.html#declaring-local-classes)
- Accessing Members of an Enclosing Class
  - [Shadowing and Local Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/localclasses.html#shadowing-and-local-classes)
- [Local Classes Are Similar To Inner Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/localclasses.html#local-classes-are-similar-to-inner-classes)

##### [Declaring Local Classes]()

You can define a local class inside any block (see [Expressions, Statements, and Blocks](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/expressions.html) for more information). For example, you can define a local class in a method body, a `for` loop, or an `if` clause.

The following example, [`LocalClassExample`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/examples/LocalClassExample.java), validates two phone numbers. It defines the local class `PhoneNumber` in the method `validatePhoneNumber`:

```
public class LocalClassExample {
  
    static String regularExpression = "[^0-9]";
  
    public static void validatePhoneNumber(
        String phoneNumber1, String phoneNumber2) {
      
        final int numberLength = 10;
        
        // Valid in JDK 8 and later:
       
        // int numberLength = 10;
       
        class PhoneNumber {
            
            String formattedPhoneNumber = null;

            PhoneNumber(String phoneNumber){
                // numberLength = 7;
                String currentNumber = phoneNumber.replaceAll(
                  regularExpression, "");
                if (currentNumber.length() == numberLength)
                    formattedPhoneNumber = currentNumber;
                else
                    formattedPhoneNumber = null;
            }

            public String getNumber() {
                return formattedPhoneNumber;
            }
            
            // Valid in JDK 8 and later:

//            public void printOriginalNumbers() {
//                System.out.println("Original numbers are " + phoneNumber1 +
//                    " and " + phoneNumber2);
//            }
        }

        PhoneNumber myNumber1 = new PhoneNumber(phoneNumber1);
        PhoneNumber myNumber2 = new PhoneNumber(phoneNumber2);
        
        // Valid in JDK 8 and later:

//        myNumber1.printOriginalNumbers();

        if (myNumber1.getNumber() == null) 
            System.out.println("First number is invalid");
        else
            System.out.println("First number is " + myNumber1.getNumber());
        if (myNumber2.getNumber() == null)
            System.out.println("Second number is invalid");
        else
            System.out.println("Second number is " + myNumber2.getNumber());

    }

    public static void main(String... args) {
        validatePhoneNumber("123-456-7890", "456-7890");
    }
}


```

The example validates a phone number by first removing all characters from the phone number except the digits 0 through 9. After, it checks whether the phone number contains exactly ten digits (the length of a phone number in North America). This example prints the following:

```
First number is 1234567890
Second number is invalid
```

##### [Accessing Members of an Enclosing Class]()

A local class has access to the members of its enclosing class. In the previous example, the `PhoneNumber` constructor accesses the member `LocalClassExample.regularExpression`.

In addition, a local class has access to local variables. However, a local class can only access local variables that are declared final. When a local class accesses a local variable or parameter of the enclosing block, it *captures* that variable or parameter. For example, the `PhoneNumber` constructor can access the local variable `numberLength` because it is declared final; `numberLength` is a *captured variable*.

However, starting in Java SE 8, a local class can access local variables and parameters of the enclosing block that are final or *effectively final*. A variable or parameter whose value is never changed after it is initialized is effectively final. For example, suppose that the variable `numberLength` is not declared final, and you add the highlighted assignment statement in the `PhoneNumber` constructor to change the length of a valid phone number to 7 digits:

```
PhoneNumber(String phoneNumber) {
    numberLength = 7;
    String currentNumber = phoneNumber.replaceAll(
        regularExpression, "");
    if (currentNumber.length() == numberLength)
        formattedPhoneNumber = currentNumber;
    else
        formattedPhoneNumber = null;
}
```

Because of this assignment statement, the variable `numberLength` is not effectively final anymore. As a result, the Java compiler generates an error message similar to "local variables referenced from an inner class must be final or effectively final" where the inner class `PhoneNumber` tries to access the `numberLength` variable:

```
if (currentNumber.length() == numberLength)
```

Starting in Java SE 8, if you declare the local class in a method, it can access the method's parameters. For example, you can define the following method in the `PhoneNumber` local class:

```
public void printOriginalNumbers() {
    System.out.println("Original numbers are " + phoneNumber1 +
        " and " + phoneNumber2);
}
```

The method `printOriginalNumbers` accesses the parameters `phoneNumber1` and `phoneNumber2` of the method `validatePhoneNumber`.

###### [Shadowing and Local Classes]()

Declarations of a type (such as a variable) in a local class shadow declarations in the enclosing scope that have the same name. See [Shadowing](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/nested.html#shadowing) for more information.

##### [Local Classes Are Similar To Inner Classes]()

Local classes are similar to inner classes because they cannot define or declare any static members. Local classes in static methods, such as the class `PhoneNumber`, which is defined in the static method `validatePhoneNumber`, can only refer to static members of the enclosing class. For example, if you do not define the member variable `regularExpression` as static, then the Java compiler generates an error similar to "non-static variable `regularExpression` cannot be referenced from a static context."

Local classes are non-static because they have access to instance members of the enclosing block. Consequently, they cannot contain most kinds of static declarations.

You cannot declare an interface inside a block; interfaces are inherently static. For example, the following code excerpt does not compile because the interface `HelloThere` is defined inside the body of the method `greetInEnglish`:

```
    public void greetInEnglish() {
        interface HelloThere {
           public void greet();
        }
        class EnglishHelloThere implements HelloThere {
            public void greet() {
                System.out.println("Hello " + name);
            }
        }
        HelloThere myGreeting = new EnglishHelloThere();
        myGreeting.greet();
    }
```

You cannot declare static initializers or member interfaces in a local class. The following code excerpt does not compile because the method `EnglishGoodbye.sayGoodbye` is declared `static`. The compiler generates an error similar to "modifier 'static' is only allowed in constant variable declaration" when it encounters this method definition:

```
    public void sayGoodbyeInEnglish() {
        class EnglishGoodbye {
            public static void sayGoodbye() {
                System.out.println("Bye bye");
            }
        }
        EnglishGoodbye.sayGoodbye();
    }
```

A local class can have static members provided that they are constant variables. (A *constant variable* is a variable of primitive type or type `String` that is declared final and initialized with a compile-time constant expression. A compile-time constant expression is typically a string or an arithmetic expression that can be evaluated at compile time. See [Understanding Class Members](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/classvars.html) for more information.) The following code excerpt compiles because the static member `EnglishGoodbye.farewell` is a constant variable:

```
    public void sayGoodbyeInEnglish() {
        class EnglishGoodbye {
            public static final String farewell = "Bye bye";
            public void sayGoodbye() {
                System.out.println(farewell);
            }
        }
        EnglishGoodbye myEnglishGoodbye = new EnglishGoodbye();
        myEnglishGoodbye.sayGoodbye();
    }待补充。。。
```

#### 匿名类（Anonymous Classes）


Anonymous classes enable you to make your code more concise. They enable you to declare and instantiate a class at the same time. They are like local classes except that they do not have a name. Use them if you need to use a local class only once.

This section covers the following topics:

- [Declaring Anonymous Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/anonymousclasses.html#declaring-anonymous-classes)
- [Syntax of Anonymous Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/anonymousclasses.html#syntax-of-anonymous-classes)
- [Accessing Local Variables of the Enclosing Scope, and Declaring and Accessing Members of the Anonymous Class](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/anonymousclasses.html#accessing)
- [Examples of Anonymous Classes](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/anonymousclasses.html#examples-of-anonymous-classes)

##### [Declaring Anonymous Classes]()

While local classes are class declarations, anonymous classes are expressions, which means that you define the class in another expression. The following example, [`HelloWorldAnonymousClasses`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/examples/HelloWorldAnonymousClasses.java), uses anonymous classes in the initialization statements of the local variables `frenchGreeting` and `spanishGreeting`, but uses a local class for the initialization of the variable `englishGreeting``:`

```
public class HelloWorldAnonymousClasses {
  
    interface HelloWorld {
        public void greet();
        public void greetSomeone(String someone);
    }
  
    public void sayHello() {
        
        class EnglishGreeting implements HelloWorld {
            String name = "world";
            public void greet() {
                greetSomeone("world");
            }
            public void greetSomeone(String someone) {
                name = someone;
                System.out.println("Hello " + name);
            }
        }
      
        HelloWorld englishGreeting = new EnglishGreeting();
        
        HelloWorld frenchGreeting = new HelloWorld() {
            String name = "tout le monde";
            public void greet() {
                greetSomeone("tout le monde");
            }
            public void greetSomeone(String someone) {
                name = someone;
                System.out.println("Salut " + name);
            }
        };
        
        HelloWorld spanishGreeting = new HelloWorld() {
            String name = "mundo";
            public void greet() {
                greetSomeone("mundo");
            }
            public void greetSomeone(String someone) {
                name = someone;
                System.out.println("Hola, " + name);
            }
        };
        englishGreeting.greet();
        frenchGreeting.greetSomeone("Fred");
        spanishGreeting.greet();
    }

    public static void main(String... args) {
        HelloWorldAnonymousClasses myApp =
            new HelloWorldAnonymousClasses();
        myApp.sayHello();
    }            
}

```

##### [Syntax of Anonymous Classes]()

As mentioned previously, an anonymous class is an expression. The syntax of an anonymous class expression is like the invocation of a constructor, except that there is a class definition contained in a block of code.

Consider the instantiation of the `frenchGreeting` object:

```
        HelloWorld frenchGreeting = new HelloWorld() {
            String name = "tout le monde";
            public void greet() {
                greetSomeone("tout le monde");
            }
            public void greetSomeone(String someone) {
                name = someone;
                System.out.println("Salut " + name);
            }
        };
```

The anonymous class expression consists of the following:

- The `new` operator
- The name of an interface to implement or a class to extend. In this example, the anonymous class is implementing the interface `HelloWorld`.
- Parentheses that contain the arguments to a constructor, just like a normal class instance creation expression. **Note**: When you implement an interface, there is no constructor, so you use an empty pair of parentheses, as in this example.
- A body, which is a class declaration body. More specifically, in the body, method declarations are allowed but statements are not.

Because an anonymous class definition is an expression, it must be part of a statement. In this example, the anonymous class expression is part of the statement that instantiates the `frenchGreeting` object. (This explains why there is a semicolon after the closing brace.)

##### [Accessing Local Variables of the Enclosing Scope, and Declaring and Accessing Members of the Anonymous Class]()

Like local classes, anonymous classes can [capture variables](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/localclasses.html#accessing-members-of-an-enclosing-class); they have the same access to local variables of the enclosing scope:

- An anonymous class has access to the members of its enclosing class.
- An anonymous class cannot access local variables in its enclosing scope that are not declared as `final` or effectively final.
- Like a nested class, a declaration of a type (such as a variable) in an anonymous class shadows any other declarations in the enclosing scope that have the same name. See [Shadowing](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/nested.html#shadowing) for more information.

Anonymous classes also have the same restrictions as local classes with respect to their members:

- You cannot declare static initializers or member interfaces in an anonymous class.
- An anonymous class can have static members provided that they are constant variables.

Note that you can declare the following in anonymous classes:

- Fields
- Extra methods (even if they do not implement any methods of the supertype)
- Instance initializers
- Local classes

However, you cannot declare constructors in an anonymous class.

##### [Examples of Anonymous Classes]()

Anonymous classes are often used in graphical user interface (GUI) applications.

Consider the JavaFX example [`HelloWorld.java`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/get-started-tutorial/hello_world.htm) (from the section [Hello World, JavaFX Style](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/get-started-tutorial/hello_world.htm) from [Getting Started with JavaFX](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/get-started-tutorial/javafx_get_started.htm)). This sample creates a frame that contains a **Say 'Hello World'** button. The anonymous class expression is highlighted:

```
import javafx.event.ActionEvent;
import javafx.event.EventHandler;
import javafx.scene.Scene;
import javafx.scene.control.Button;
import javafx.scene.layout.StackPane;
import javafx.stage.Stage;
 
public class HelloWorld extends Application {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        launch(args);
    }
    
    @Override
    public void start(Stage primaryStage) {
        primaryStage.setTitle("Hello World!");
        Button btn = new Button();
        btn.setText("Say 'Hello World'");
        btn.setOnAction(new EventHandler<ActionEvent>() {
 
            @Override
            public void handle(ActionEvent event) {
                System.out.println("Hello World!");
            }
        });
        
        StackPane root = new StackPane();
        root.getChildren().add(btn);
        primaryStage.setScene(new Scene(root, 300, 250));
        primaryStage.show();
    }
}
```

In this example, the method invocation `btn.setOnAction` specifies what happens when you select the **Say 'Hello World'** button. This method requires an object of type `EventHandler<ActionEvent>`. The `EventHandler<ActionEvent>` interface contains only one method, handle. Instead of implementing this method with a new class, the example uses an anonymous class expression. Notice that this expression is the argument passed to the `btn.setOnAction` method.

Because the `EventHandler<ActionEvent>` interface contains only one method, you can use a lambda expression instead of an anonymous class expression. See the section [Lambda Expressions](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/lambdaexpressions.html) for more information.

Anonymous classes are ideal for implementing an interface that contains two or more methods. The following JavaFX example is from the section [Customization of UI Controls](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/user-interface-tutorial/custom.htm). The highlighted code creates a text field that only accepts numeric values. It redefines the default implementation of the `TextField` class with an anonymous class by overriding the `replaceText` and `replaceSelection` methods inherited from the `TextInputControl` class.

```
import javafx.application.Application;
import javafx.event.ActionEvent;
import javafx.event.EventHandler;
import javafx.geometry.Insets;
import javafx.scene.Group;
import javafx.scene.Scene;
import javafx.scene.control.*;
import javafx.scene.layout.GridPane;
import javafx.scene.layout.HBox;
import javafx.stage.Stage;

public class CustomTextFieldSample extends Application {
    
    final static Label label = new Label();
 
    @Override
    public void start(Stage stage) {
        Group root = new Group();
        Scene scene = new Scene(root, 300, 150);
        stage.setScene(scene);
        stage.setTitle("Text Field Sample");
 
        GridPane grid = new GridPane();
        grid.setPadding(new Insets(10, 10, 10, 10));
        grid.setVgap(5);
        grid.setHgap(5);
 
        scene.setRoot(grid);
        final Label dollar = new Label("$");
        GridPane.setConstraints(dollar, 0, 0);
        grid.getChildren().add(dollar);
        
        final TextField sum = new TextField() {
            @Override
            public void replaceText(int start, int end, String text) {
                if (!text.matches("[a-z, A-Z]")) {
                    super.replaceText(start, end, text);                     
                }
                label.setText("Enter a numeric value");
            }
 
            @Override
            public void replaceSelection(String text) {
                if (!text.matches("[a-z, A-Z]")) {
                    super.replaceSelection(text);
                }
            }
        };
 
        sum.setPromptText("Enter the total");
        sum.setPrefColumnCount(10);
        GridPane.setConstraints(sum, 1, 0);
        grid.getChildren().add(sum);
        
        Button submit = new Button("Submit");
        GridPane.setConstraints(submit, 2, 0);
        grid.getChildren().add(submit);
        
        submit.setOnAction(new EventHandler<ActionEvent>() {
            @Override
            public void handle(ActionEvent e) {
                label.setText(null);
            }
        });
        
        GridPane.setConstraints(label, 0, 1);
        GridPane.setColumnSpan(label, 3);
        grid.getChildren().add(label);
        
        scene.setRoot(grid);
        stage.show();
    }
 
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        launch(args);
    }
}
```

### 遮盖（Shadowing）、变量作用域问题

如果在特定范围内（比如在内部类或者方法中）有一个声明（成员变量声明或者方法参数名字）与该范围外的另一个声明拥有相同的名字，那么该范围内的声明就会遮盖掉范围外的声明。你就不能仅简单地通过名字来引用被遮盖的那个声明，请看下面的例子：

```java
public class ShadowTest {

    public int x = 0;

    class FirstLevel {

        public int x = 1;

        void methodInFirstLevel(int x) {
            System.out.println("x = " + x);
            System.out.println("this.x = " + this.x);
            System.out.println("ShadowTest.this.x = " + ShadowTest.this.x);
        }
    }

    public static void main(String... args) {
        ShadowTest st = new ShadowTest();
        ShadowTest.FirstLevel fl = st.new FirstLevel();
        fl.methodInFirstLevel(23);
    }
}
```
输出结果如下:
```java
x = 23
this.x = 1
ShadowTest.this.x = 0
```
该例子中定义了3个名为x的变量：类ShadowTest的成员变量、内部类FirstLevel的成员变量、methodInFirstLevel方法的形参。methodInFirstLevel方法的形参遮盖住了内部类FirstLevel的成员变量，因此，当你在方法中使用x时，x表示的是方法的参数x。想要获得内部类FirstLevel的成员变量x，要通过关键字**this** 来代表外部的作用域（enclosing scope），也就是FirstLevel类：

```java
System.out.println("this.x = " + this.x);
```
要获取到更大作用域的成员变量时，需要通过其所属的类的类名来访问，比如以下的语句，在methodInFirstLevel方法中获取最外层的ShadowTest 类的成员变量x

```java
System.out.println("ShadowTest.this.x = " + ShadowTest.this.x);
```

参考资料：https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/nested.html